## Lectures
### Cholelithiasis



### Nephrolithiasis


### Guest Lecture - Lobay



### Clinical aspects of pain



### Varicella & Zoster



## Articles

### Basbaum - Cellular and molecular mechanisms of pain

#### Key Points - Autogenerated

- The nervous system detects and interprets a wide range of thermal and mechanical stimuli as well as environmental and endogenous chemical irritants. ​
- Intense stimuli generate acute pain, and persistent injury can lead to chronic pain. ​
- Plasticity in the pain transmission pathway can enhance pain signals and produce hypersensitivity. ​
- Genetic, electrophysiological, and pharmacological studies are elucidating the molecular mechanisms that underlie pain detection, coding, and modulation. ​
- The ability to detect noxious stimuli is essential for survival and wellbeing. ​
- Alterations in the pain pathway can lead to hypersensitivity, chronic pain, and a loss of protective behaviors. ​
- Tissue or nerve damage can elicit hyperactivity to promote guarding of the injured area. ​
- Sensitization can result in allodynia (perceiving normally innocuous stimuli as painful) and hyperalgesia (perceiving normally painful stimuli as more intense). ​
- Chronic pain can persist long after an acute injury, such as lower back pain or sciatica. ​
- Nociceptors are subpopulations of peripheral nerve fibers that detect intense thermal, mechanical, or chemical stimuli. ​
- There are two major classes of nociceptors: medium diameter myelinated (Aδ) afferents and small diameter unmyelinated (C) fibers. ​
- Nociceptors can be further subdivided based on their response to heat, mechanical, or chemical stimuli. ​
- The nociceptor is a bidirectional signaling machine, with central and peripheral terminals that can send and receive messages. ​
- Primary afferent nerve fibers project to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, which is organized into anatomically and electrophysiologically distinct laminae. ​
- Projection neurons in the dorsal horn transmit pain messages to the brain via ascending pathways. ​
- Pain is processed by a distributed group of brain structures, including the somatosensory cortex, anterior cingulate gyrus, insular cortex, and other regions. ​
- Descending controls from the brain can influence the transmission of pain messages at the level of the spinal cord. ​
- Acute pain is generated by the activation of nociceptors in response to thermal, mechanical, or chemical stimuli. ​
- Heat is detected by the TRPV1 channel, which is also activated by capsaicin. ​
- Cold is detected by the TRPM8 channel, which is also activated by menthol. ​
- Mechanical stimuli are detected by mechanosensitive channels, such as DEG/ENaC channels and TRP channels. ​
- Chemical irritants and pro-algesic agents can sensitize nociceptors and enhance pain sensitivity. ​
- Voltage-gated sodium channels, such as Nav1.7 and Nav1.8, play a key role in pain transmission. ​
- Voltage-gated calcium channels, such as Cav2.2 and Cav2.3, are upregulated in inflammatory pain models. ​
- The inflammatory soup, consisting of various signaling molecules, can sensitize nociceptors and contribute to peripheral sensitization.
- NGF and other neurotrophins can enhance the excitability of nociceptors and contribute to pain hypersensitivity.
- Peripheral sensitization can result from changes in the properties of nerve fibers or alterations in the chemical environment of the nerve fiber. ​
- Microglial activation and the release of cytokines can contribute to central sensitization and enhanced pain perception. 

#### Basic Knowledge

- Cell bodies of nociceptors are located in the dorsal root ganglia (body) and trigeminal ganglia (face).
- Pain tends to sensitize, meaning that the area becomes more susceptible to pain.
- Most nociceptor fibres are polymodal - meaning that they can detect multiple different types of pain. C fibres can be both heat and mechanically sensitive. 
- Nociceptors carry information in both directions.
	- Axon splits into two, one branch travels to the periphery and one branch travels to the CNS (skin, muscles, viscera; spinal cord, brain stem)
	- Pain signals travel tot he CNS via the axon that detects it. It goes towards the cell body, only to turn into the central terminal branch.
		- CNS communication via the DRG cell bodies can mediate this transfer by intercepting it at the middle, like putting a stop sign at an intersection.
		- Accessory fibers can access the main signal and amplify/decrease it along the way. They can also affect the initial action potential by releasing mediating neurotransmitters at the site of stimulation.

#### Neuropeptides

- Substance P
- Calcitonin-gene related peptide (CGRP)
- Nerve growth factor (NGF) - Recognized by TrkA neurotrophin receptor

#### Fibres

Nociceptors can be distinguished by differential expression of channels that confer sensitivity to heat, cold, acidic milieu, and chemical irritants.
- Heat -> TRPV1 (vanniloid)
- Cold -> TRPM8 (menthol), TRPA1
- Acidic milieu -> ASIC channels
- Chemical irritants -> TRPA1 

> **TRP** -> **T**ransient **R**eceptor **P**otential receptor

**Primary Afferent Nerve Fibres**
- From periphery TO the spinal cord (dorsal horn; CNS).
- Alpha-delta project to Lamina I to Lamina V
- Alpha-beta project to deeper ones like III to V (because they are low-threshold?)
- C nociceptors project more to laminae I and II
- 

**C Fibres**
- Peptidergic C Fibres release neuropeptides
- Non-peptidergic express c-Ret neurotrophin receptor which recognizes glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)

**Chemical Nociception**
- Environmental irritants
- TRPA1
	- Responds to structurally diverse set of compounds which can all form covalent adducts with thiols.
- Irritants are produced in damaged tissues or due to physiological stress.
- Interface between acute and chronic pain.

#### Conducting Pain

**Voltage gated sodium channels**
- Nav1.7 is a very important member of this family as mutations of this gene greatly affect the way that pain is perceived.
- Nav1.8 is responsible for most of the conduction at low temperatures.

#### Possible Questions

1. Briefly describe the two main classes of Alpha-delta nociceptors and the types of pain they mediate.
	1. Class I - high threshold mechanical nociceptors respond to mechanical and chemical stimuli, but have high heat thresholds. Heat or mechanical threshold drops when at an injury. First pain of heat.
	2. Class II - Lower heat threshold, high mechanical threshold. First pain of pinprick pain.
2. Explain the significance of nociceptor sensitization in the context of pain perception.
	1. Repeated stimulation of nociceptors leads to the release of 

### Bridgestock - Anatomy, physiology, and pharmacology...pain



### Zerboni - Molecular mechanisms of VZV pathogenesis

**Varicella** is chickenpox, and **Zoster** is shingles.
Chickenpox occurs on first infection, and Zoster in subsequent infections.

#### Primary Infection

- Virions access sensory nerve cells in ganglia by retrograde axonal transport from skin sites of replication. REPLICATES NEAR SKIN.
	- Latent infection established.
	- Reactivation causes VZV to reach the skin via anterograde axonal transport to cause Zoster.
		- Vesicular rash in the **dermatome** that is innervated by the affected ganglion.
- Varicella vaccine introduced in 1995.

#### Research

- VZV is highly human specific, making it hard to study.
	- Mouse xenografts
		- Skin, thymus-liver, dorsal root ganglion
		- This can show functions of viral genes that are not as important in tissue culture but are more needed for intact tissues.

#### T-cell Tropism

- Discovered using T-cell xenografts.
	- CD3, CD4, CD8, and CD4/CD8 T-cells are all susceptible to carry the virus.
		- CD4 T-cells predominantly show memory T-cell phenotype, and express skin-homing proteins.
			- T-cells travel to the skin, through the skin microvasculature, and concentrates around hair follicle cells. 
	- Tonsil T-cells may play a role as the primary site of infection when breathing in viral particles.

#### Skin Tropism

- Pathogenesis is regulated by innate cellular responses.
- Lesion formation is highly regulated that is determined by innate immune responses of epidermal and dermal cells. 
	- Infection initially appears around hair follicles and spreads to adjacent cells.
	- Multi-nucleated polykaryotes are formed when adjacent infected cells fuse together.
		- Adjacent cells have upregulated INF alpha and beta, STAT1, and NF-kB - these orchestrate innate immune responses. The multinucleated cells are downregulated in these proteins.
		- Adjacent cells also have upregulated STAT3, presumable to ensure that nearby cells remain susceptible to infection.
- Lytic virus
- **Promyelocytic leukemia protein** is important and has has antiviral effects against many viruses. This protein assists in restricting new virions from exiting the nucleus into the cytoplasm. 
- Infected cells have downregulated STAT1, more survivin and more STAT3 (which may promote production of more survivin)
	- Survivin promotes the cell's resistance to death by inhibiting apoptosis and helping in division.
- Cell-cell fusion is a prominent characteristic of BZB pathogenesis, but it must be tightly controlled for optimal skin infection.
- Virus travels to the skin via nerve axons or infected T-cells.

#### Neurotropism

- VZV is harboured in dorsal root ganglia and exhibits lytic infection. 
- Neuron cell bodies often fuse to satellite cells which also gain VZV infection.
- If the virus doesn't fully make it to latency (as in some VZV mutants), virions continue to be produced at low levels. This low-level production leads to extensive tissue damage, disruption of cell matrix, elimination of neurons, and proliferation of satellite cells.
- Neurotropism is hard to study because you cannot really give mice human nerves.

#### Possible Questions

1. Which proteins are affected by VZV infection? Downregulated? Upregulated?
	- STAT1 - down
	- STAT3 - up
	- survivin - up
	- NF-kB - down
	- INF-alpha & beta - down
2. Which T-cell types are affected by VZV?
	- CD3+, subtype CD4+ and CD8+, as well as CD4/CD8+
3. Why are SCID mice good for modelling VZV infection?
	- SCID: severe combined immunodeficiency - no mature T or B cells.
	- Does not reject the virus
	- Does not reject grafts